Dense-PMSFNet: Retinal Vasculature and FAZ Segmentation in OCTA Images
This repository contains the implementation of Dense-PMSFNet for accurate segmentation of retinal microvasculature (arteries, veins, capillaries) and the Foveal Avascular Zone (FAZ) in OCTA images.

File Descriptions
data_loader.py: Preprocesses OCTA images and saves them as a compressed .npz file.
train.py: Trains the Dense-PMSFNet model using configurations from config.yaml and preprocessed data.
test.py: Evaluates the trained model on the test set and generates predictions.
config.yaml: Contains training and testing parameters (dataset paths, hyperparameters, model settings).
requirements.txt: Lists Python dependencies required for running the code.
models/: Folder with model architectures used for comparison.
model.py: Implementation of the Dense-PMSFNet model architecture for retinal vasculature and FAZ segmentation.
Clone the Repository
git clone github.com/nisan-project/Dense-PMSFNet-Retinal-Vasculature-and-FAZ-Segmentation-Network-in-OCTA-Images.git
Create a Virtual Environment & Install Dependencies
python -m venv env  
source env/bin/activate  # For Linux/Mac  
env\Scripts\activate     # For Windows  
pip install -r requirements.txt  
Preprocess & Save the Dataset
Run the following command to preprocess and save the dataset as a compressed NumPy file (dataset.npz):

python data_loader.py --config config.yaml
Training the Model
Run Training Script
To train Dense-PMSFNet, use:

python train.py --config config.yaml
Testing the Model
After training, evaluate the model on the test set and generate predictions using:

python test.py --config config.yaml
This research introduces Dense-PMSFNet, a lightweight deep learning model designed for accurate segmentation of retinal vasculature and the Foveal Avascular Zone (FAZ) in Optical Coherence Tomography Angiography (OCTA) images. The model incorporates a DenseNet-based encoder and a Pyramidal Multi-Scale Fusion Module (PMSFM) to handle multi-scale vessel variations. A deep fusion decoder ensures high spatial precision. Evaluated on the OCTA-500 dataset, the model demonstrates state-of-the-art segmentation performance with a combined Dice + Focal loss, making it suitable for real-time diabetic retinopathy (DR) screening and clinical applications.

Retinal vessel segmentation is a key step towards the accurate visualization, diagnosis, early treatment and surgery planning of ocular diseases. Recently, deep learning based retinal vessel segmentation methods have reached the state-of-the-art performance. Due to the extreme variations in the morphology of the vessels against the noisy background, these methods still have issues of dealing with small thin vessels, low discriminative ability at the optic disk area, etc. In this paper, we proposed a U-Net-like model with the weighted attention mechanism and the skip connection scheme for addressing these issues. Experimental results on two benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed methods.
